Among undergraduates, the term "engineering" is fairly familiar. The vast majority of them believe it opens them a plethora of opportunities and financial advantages. While some of these assertions are not untrue, the manner in which they are pushed is far from reality.
Computer engineering is, unsurprisingly, the most popular field among students, owing to the apparent 8-figure pay headlines that Indian parents read in the papers.
For most students, it's all about switching to software engineering rather than understanding the technologies in their engineering discipline, ostensibly to improve career prospects. There is no wrong in aiming for a financially prosperous future; however, the key challenge faced due to this herd mentality is the suffocation of employability skills resulting in a strong mismatch between the frameworks required by the corporate world and the ones being learned by students.
In India, students are programmed into following a structure that leads to their ambitions at the expense of critical abilities such as communication, management, and leadership skills, and most importantly, creativity.
Communication is crucial in any discipline. Professionals cannot function like robots with minimal human interaction; they must broaden their thinking to include ideas and suggestions from colleagues. Effective managerial skills are required for any organisation to grow and achieve its goals and objectives, and professionals always seek them among the candidates. A steady stream of fresh content, innovative ideas, and out-of-the-box thinking can help one stand out from the crowd and be recognized thereby encouraging leadership qualities.
According to statistics, only 7% of India's engineers are employable, leaving 50% of engineers jobless and most working engineers dissatisfied with their pay grade. As a result, many people leave their jobs in quest of better opportunities, which they seldom see.
If the youth is not adequately educated and made aware of the myths surrounding engineering, the future is predicted to experience even more decline. Decentralizing the learning curve, fostering core skills and research opportunities in various engineering disciplines, building business etiquettes to stimulate entrepreneurship, and prioritizing co-curricular learning activities is the need of the hour.


